docs(maas): add installation guide and AuroraBoot disk.maas reference (#656)
kairos-io/kairos-docs: docs/installation/maas.md

---
title: "Installation with Canonical MaaS"
sidebar_label: "Canonical MaaS"
sidebar_position: 8
date: 2026-08-03
description: Deploy Kairos on bare metal fleets managed by Canonical MaaS
---

Kairos can be deployed onto machines managed by [Canonical MaaS](https://maas.io/) (Metal as a Service). You build a Kairos image once, upload it to MaaS as a custom image, and MaaS deploys it to any commissioned machine. The Kairos MaaS datasource then reads the per-machine metadata (hostname, SSH keys, user-data) that MaaS provides.

## How it works

MaaS deploys custom images by writing them to disk with `dd` and then chrooting into a partition that contains a `curtin` hook script, which finalises the install in the MaaS ephemeral environment.

> The MaaS-flavoured Kairos raw image differs from a regular Kairos raw image in one thing only: an additional small `COS_CURTIN` partition that carries the curtin hook. Curtin picks that partition as its target because it is the one that contains `/curtin`, and the hook then:

Reviewer: I wonder if MaaS-flavored won't be confusing with the kairos flavors. Or is MaaS indeed a distro/release?

Author: You are right. No, MaaS is not a Kairos flavor, it's just an overloaded term :). Changed "The MaaS-flavoured Kairos raw image" → "The Kairos raw image built for MaaS"

> The MaaS-flavoured Kairos raw image differs from a regular Kairos raw image in one thing only: an additional small `COS_CURTIN` partition that carries the curtin hook. Curtin picks that partition as its target because it is the one that contains `/curtin`, and the hook then:

Author: ```suggestion
The Kairos raw image built for MaaS differs from a regular Kairos raw image in one thing only: an additional small `COS_CURTIN` partition that carries the curtin hook. Curtin picks that partition as its target because it is the one that contains `/curtin`, and the hook then:
```

1. Mounts `COS_OEM` by label.
2. Extracts the MaaS datasource block (metadata URL and OAuth credentials) from the curtin config that MaaS passes in and writes it to `/oem/maas/datasource.yaml`.
3. Translates the per-machine network config that MaaS assigned (either cloud-init v1 or netplan v2) into systemd-networkd `.network` files, written as a Kairos cloud-config at `/oem/90_maas_network.yaml` for the `initramfs` stage.
4. Unmounts `COS_OEM`.

The hook does not install a kernel, GRUB, EFI entries, or an `fstab`. The Kairos image is already bootable, so once the write is done MaaS reboots the machine and Kairos takes over.

> On first boot, the Kairos MaaS datasource provider (part of yip, enabled by default in the Kairos datasource list) reads `/oem/maas/datasource.yaml`, authenticates against the MaaS metadata API with OAuth 1.0, writes the hostname and `authorized_keys`, and passes the MaaS `user-data` to Kairos as cloud-config. The `90_maas_network.yaml` written by the curtin hook applies the network configuration during the `initramfs` stage.

Reviewer: What does curtin mean? I see it's used below in COS_ but never heard of this before

> On first boot, the Kairos MaaS datasource provider (part of yip, enabled by default in the Kairos datasource list) reads `/oem/maas/datasource.yaml`, authenticates against the MaaS metadata API with OAuth 1.0, writes the hostname and `authorized_keys`, and passes the MaaS `user-data` to Kairos as cloud-config. The `90_maas_network.yaml` written by the curtin hook applies the network configuration during the `initramfs` stage.

Author: ```suggestion
On first boot, the Kairos MaaS datasource provider (part of yip, enabled by default in the Kairos datasource list) reads `/oem/maas/datasource.yaml`, authenticates against the MaaS metadata API with OAuth 1.0, writes the hostname and `authorized_keys`, and passes the MaaS `user-data` to Kairos as cloud-config. The `90_maas_network.yaml` written by the [curtin](https://github.com/canonical/curtin) hook applies the network configuration during the `initramfs` stage.
```

Neither did I before this ticket. I added link to the "canonical" location for curtin.
